Update quicktour (#2463)
huggingface/diffusers: docs/source/en/quicktour.mdx

specific language governing permissions and limitations under the License.
-->

[[open-in-colab]]

# Quicktour

Diffusion models are trained to denoise random Gaussian noise step-by-step to generate a sample of interest, such as an image or audio. This has sparked a tremendous amount of interest in generative AI, and you have probably seen examples of diffusion generated images on the internet. 🧨 Diffusers is a library aimed at making diffusion models widely accessible to everyone.

Whether you're a developer or an everyday user, this quicktour will introduce you to 🧨 Diffusers and help you get up and generating quickly! There are three main components of the library to know about:

* The [`DiffusionPipeline`] is a high-level end-to-end class designed to rapidly generate samples from pretrained diffusion models for inference.
* Popular pretrained [model](./api/models) architectures and modules that can be used as building blocks for creating diffusion systems.

> * Many different [schedulers](./api/schedulers/overview) - algorithms that control how noise is added - for generating samples from noise during inference and generating noisy images for training.

Reviewer: Should we additionally mention that we provide example training scripts that are aimed at education purposes and also for the community to build on top of? It's beautifully explained in the `examples` README: https://github.com/huggingface/diffusers/tree/main/examples#-diffusers-examples

> * Many different [schedulers](./api/schedulers/overview) - algorithms that control how noise is added - for generating samples from noise during inference and generating noisy images for training.

Author: Good idea, I added it to the Next Steps section at the end so we don't interrupt the readers flow with too many links! :)

The quicktour will show you how to use the [`DiffusionPipeline`] for inference, and then walk you through how to combine a model and scheduler to replicate what's happening inside the [`DiffusionPipeline`].

<Tip>

> The quicktour is a simplified version of the introductory 🧨 Diffusers [notebook](https://colab.research.google.com/github/huggingface/notebooks/blob/main/diffusers/diffusers_intro.ipynb) to help you get started quickly. If you're curious to learn more about 🧨 Diffusers goal, design philosophy, and additional details about it's core API, check out the notebook!

Reviewer: I think it's okay as a notebook.

</Tip>

Before you begin, make sure you have all the necessary libraries installed:

```bash
pip install --upgrade diffusers accelerate transformers
```

- [🤗 Accelerate](https://huggingface.co/docs/accelerate/index) speeds up model loading for inference and training.

> - [🤗 Transformers](https://huggingface.co/docs/transformers/index) is required to run the most popular diffusion models, such as [Stable Diffusion](https://huggingface.co/docs/diffusers/api/pipelines/stable_diffusion/overview).

Reviewer: Following https://github.com/huggingface/diffusers/pull/2463/files#r1115151675

🤗🤗🤗

| Unconditional Image Generation          | generate an image from Gaussian noise | [unconditional_image_generation](./using-diffusers/unconditional_image_generation) |
| Text-Guided Image Generation | generate an image given a text prompt | [conditional_image_generation](./using-diffusers/conditional_image_generation) |
| Text-Guided Image-to-Image Translation     | adapt an image guided by a text prompt | [img2img](./using-diffusers/img2img) |
| Text-Guided Image-Inpainting          | fill the masked part of an image given the image, the mask and a text prompt | [inpaint](./using-diffusers/inpaint) |
| Text-Guided Depth-to-Image Translation | adapt parts of an image guided by a text prompt while preserving structure via depth estimation | [depth2img](./using-diffusers/depth2img) |

Start by creating an instance of [`DiffusionPipeline`] and specify which pipeline checkpoint you would like to download.
You can use the [`DiffusionPipeline`] for any [checkpoint](https://huggingface.co/models?library=diffusers&sort=downloads) stored on the Hugging Face Hub.

> In this quicktour, you'll load the [Stable Diffusion](https://huggingface.co/CompVis/stable-diffusion) checkpoint in the [`DiffusionPipeline`] for text-to-image generation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this quicktour, you'll load the [Stable Diffusion](https://huggingface.co/CompVis/stable-diffusion) checkpoint in the [`DiffusionPipeline`] for text-to-image generation. Specifically, you will use the [`stable-diffiusion-v1-5`](https://huggingface.co/runwayml/stable-diffusion-v1-5) checkpoint.
```

<Tip warning={true}>

For [Stable Diffusion](https://huggingface.co/CompVis/stable-diffusion) models, please carefully read the [license](https://huggingface.co/spaces/CompVis/stable-diffusion-license) first before running the model.

> The model's improved image generation capabilities can produce potentially harmful content.

Reviewer: Should we mention that to prevent potentially harmful content from being passed to the end user, we use the `safety_checker`?

Author: Great idea, I didn't even know this existed!

> This quicktour uses the [`stable-diffiusion-v1-5`](https://huggingface.co/runwayml/stable-diffusion-v1-5) checkpoint.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> </Tip>

Reviewer: Did not notice the opening tip tag 👁️

You can move the generator object to a GPU, just like you would in PyTorch:

```python
>>> pipeline.to("cuda")
```

Now you can pass a text prompt to the `pipeline` to generate an image, and then access the denoised image. By default, the image output is wrapped in a [PIL Image object](https://pillow.readthedocs.io/en/stable/reference/Image.html?highlight=image#the-image-class).

```python
>>> image = pipeline("An image of a squirrel in Picasso style").images[0]
>>> image
```

<div class="flex justify-center">
    <img src="https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/image_of_squirrel_painting.png"/>
</div>

Save the image by calling `save`:

```python
>>> image.save("image_of_squirrel_painting.png")
```

### Local pipeline

You can also use the pipeline locally. The only difference is you need to download the weights first:

```
git lfs install
git clone https://huggingface.co/runwayml/stable-diffusion-v1-5
```

Then load the saved weights into the pipeline:

```python
>>> pipeline = DiffusionPipeline.from_pretrained("./stable-diffusion-v1-5")
```

Now you can run the pipeline as you would in the section above.

> ### Swapping schedulers

Reviewer: I don't mind keeping this section here since it's precise. In the dedicated Scheduler section, we dive deeper. So I think it's okay.

> ### Swapping schedulers

Author: I think it'd be better here since we're talking about switching components in and out of the pipeline specifically. In the Scheduler section, users are learning more about it in the context of the model and it's a more manual process but it is also more flexible (meaning the user can instantiate whatever scheduler they want). I added a tip to really emphasize that last point, let me know if that's more helpful! :)

Different schedulers have different denoising speed and quality trade-offs. The best way to find out which one works best for you is to try them out! One of the main features of 🧨 Diffusers is to allow you to easily switch between schedulers. For example, to replace the default [`PNDMScheduler`] with the [`EulerDiscreteScheduler`], load it with the [`~diffusers.ConfigMixin.from_config`] method:

```py
>>> from diffusers import EulerDiscreteScheduler

>>> pipeline = StableDiffusionPipeline.from_pretrained("runwayml/stable-diffusion-v1-5")
>>> pipeline.scheduler = EulerDiscreteScheduler.from_config(pipeline.scheduler.config)
```

Try generating an image with the new scheduler and see if you notice a difference!

In the next section, you'll take a closer look at the components - the model and scheduler - that make up the [`DiffusionPipeline`] and learn how to use these components to generate an image of a cat.

## Models

> Models take a noisy sample, and at each timestep it predicts the *noise residual*, the difference between a less noisy image and the input image. You can mix and match models to create other diffusion systems.

Reviewer 2: it can predict the noise residual, but also other things - e.g. It can predict the slightly less noisy image directly in some cases. 

I think noise residual is probably the most common objective, so it's ok to only talk about that. But we probably need to point out that it's just one of the objectives so the sentence is accurate

Models are initiated with the [`~ModelMixin.from_pretrained`] method which'll also locally cache the model weights so it is faster the next time you load the model. For the quicktour, you'll load the [`UNet2DModel`], a basic unconditional image generation model with a checkpoint trained on cat images:

```py
>>> from diffusers import UNet2DModel

> >>> repo_id = "google/ddpm-cat-256"

Reviewer 2: Nice touch to use a cat model example instead of the church! 😸😸😸😸

Author: Haha imo cats are more interesting to look at than churches 😻

To use the model for inference, create the shape of an image with random Gaussian noise. It should have a `batch` axis because the model can receive multiple random noises, a `channel` axis corresponding to the number of input channels, and a `sample_size` axis for the height and width of the image:

```py
>>> import torch

>>> torch.manual_seed(0)

>>> noisy_sample = torch.randn(1, model.config.in_channels, model.config.sample_size, model.config.sample_size)
>>> noisy_sample.shape
torch.Size([1, 3, 256, 256])
```

For inference, pass the noisy image to the model and a `timestep`. The `timestep` indicates how noisy the input image is, with more noise at the beginning and less at the end. This helps the model determine its position in the diffusion process, whether it is closer to the start or the end. Use the [`~diffusers.models.unet_2d.UNet2DOutput.sample`] method to get the model output:

```py
>>> with torch.no_grad():
...     noisy_residual = model(sample=noisy_sample, timestep=2).sample
```

To generate actual examples though, you'll need a scheduler to guide the denoising process. In the next section, you'll learn how to couple a model with a scheduler.

## Schedulers

> Schedulers manage going from a noisy sample to a less noisy sample given the model output - in this case, it is the `noisy_residual`.

Reviewer: Should we add a sentence emphasizing that the majority of the pipelines inherited from `DiffusionPipeline` are meant to work with different schedulers we support from the library? 

If we want to expand on it later in the section, I' fine with that.

Author: I think we can expand on this later in a different tutorial doc focused on the pipelines. For the quicktour, I think it'd be best to keep the focus on the `DiffusionPipeline` and not really mention the other pipelines to avoid confusion/distracting the user.

```py
>>> import PIL.Image
>>> import numpy as np

>>> def display_sample(sample, i):
...     image_processed = sample.cpu().permute(0, 2, 3, 1)
...     image_processed = (image_processed + 1.0) * 127.5
...     image_processed = image_processed.numpy().astype(np.uint8)

...     image_pil = PIL.Image.fromarray(image_processed[0])
...     display(f"Image at step {i}")
...     display(image_pil)
```

To speed up the denoising process, move the input and model to a GPU:

```py
>>> model.to("cuda")
>>> noisy_sample = noisy_sample.to("cuda")
```

Now create a denoising loop that predicts the residual of the less noisy sample, and computes the less noisy sample with the scheduler:

```py
>>> import tqdm

>>> sample = noisy_sample

>>> for i, t in enumerate(tqdm.tqdm(scheduler.timesteps)):
...     # 1. predict noise residual
...     with torch.no_grad():
...         residual = model(sample, t).sample

...     # 2. compute less noisy image and set x_t -> x_t-1
...     sample = scheduler.step(residual, t, sample).prev_sample

...     # 3. optionally look at image
...     if (i + 1) % 50 == 0:
...         display_sample(sample, i + 1)

> ```

Reviewer 2: Do we need to add actual images here so users can see them without actually running the notebook?

Author: Hmm I think it'd be a nice for the user to be able to see the final output. In Transformers, I typically save the image output from the notebook and upload it to the documentation-images [repository](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images) where I can embed/link to in the docs.

```

Then load the saved weights into the pipeline:

```python
>>> pipeline = DiffusionPipeline.from_pretrained("./stable-diffusion-v1-5")
```

Now you can run the pipeline as you would in the section above.

### Swapping schedulers

Different schedulers have different denoising speed and quality trade-offs. The best way to find out which one works best for you is to try them out! One of the main features of 🧨 Diffusers is to allow you to easily switch between schedulers. For example, to replace the default [`PNDMScheduler`] with the [`EulerDiscreteScheduler`], load it with the [`~diffusers.ConfigMixin.from_config`] method:

```py
>>> from diffusers import EulerDiscreteScheduler

>>> pipeline = StableDiffusionPipeline.from_pretrained("runwayml/stable-diffusion-v1-5")
>>> pipeline.scheduler = EulerDiscreteScheduler.from_config(pipeline.scheduler.config)
```

Try generating an image with the new scheduler and see if you notice a difference!

In the next section, you'll take a closer look at the components - the model and scheduler - that make up the [`DiffusionPipeline`] and learn how to use these components to generate an image of a cat.

## Models

> Models take a noisy sample, and at each timestep it predicts the *noise residual*, the difference between a less noisy image and the input image. This is just one objective though. Other models can make different predictions like the gradient between two timesteps or predict the slightly less noisy image directly. You can mix and match models to create other diffusion systems.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Most models take a noisy sample, and at each timestep predicts the *noise residual*, (most because some models are learned to predict the previous sample directly or the velocity/v-objective <link-to-explanation-or-footnote>) the difference between a less noisy image and the input image. This is just one objective though. Other models can make different predictions like the gradient between two timesteps or predict the slightly less noisy image directly. You can mix and match models to create other diffusion systems.
```

While most models predict the noise residual, SD 2.1 doesn't predict the *noise residual* it predicts the velocity (maybe see https://github.com/huggingface/diffusers/issues/1413 and https://github.com/huggingface/diffusers/blob/5e5ce13e2f89ac45a0066cb3f369462a3cf1d9ef/src/diffusers/schedulers/scheduling_ddim.py#L110

> Models are initiated with the [`~ModelMixin.from_pretrained`] method which'll also locally cache the model weights so it is faster the next time you load the model. For the quicktour, you'll load the [`UNet2DModel`], a basic unconditional image generation model with a checkpoint trained on cat images:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Models are initiated with the [`~ModelMixin.from_pretrained`] method which will also locally cache the model weights so it is faster the next time you load the model. For the quicktour, you'll load the [`UNet2DModel`], a basic unconditional image generation model with a checkpoint trained on cat images:
```
